docs: kafka connect concepts for overview (#5504)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/overview/con-key-features-kafka-connect.adoc

// This module is included in:
//
// overview/assembly-key-features.adoc

[id="key-features-kafka-connect_{context}"]
= Kafka Connect concepts

[role="_abstract"]
Strimzi operates Kafka Connect in _distributed mode_, distributing data streaming tasks across worker nodes.
A Kafka Connect cluster comprises a group of worker nodes that have the same group id, which must be unique to that cluster.
The group id is assigned in the worker configuration through the `KafkaConnect` resource.
The worker configuration must also specify the names of internal Kafka Connect topics that the workers will use.
The internal topics are created by Kafka connect to store connector offset and status information.
The names of the topics must also be unique to the Kafka Connect cluster.

.Kafka Connect in distributed mode
image:overview/kafka-concepts-kafka-connect.png[Kafka Connect interaction in distributed mode]

> Kafka Connect loads connector instances on start up and distributes data streaming tasks and connector configuration across the worker nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kafka Connect loads existing connector instances on start up and distributes data streaming tasks and connector configuration across the worker nodes.
```

Workers run the data streaming processes for the connector instances.

> Each worker runs as a separate node to make the Kafka Connect cluster more fault tolerant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each worker runs as a separate pod to make the Kafka Connect cluster more fault tolerant.
```

Author: Changed throughout

Work is distributed evenly through load balancing and is split into tasks.
If there are more tasks than workers, workers are assigned multiple tasks.

> If a worker fails, its processes are automatically assigned to active workers in the Kafka Connect cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a worker fails, its tasks are automatically assigned to active workers in the Kafka Connect cluster.
```

== Connectors

Connectors copy data from external systems to Kafka or from Kafka into external systems.

* Source connectors push data into Kafka.
* Sink connectors extract data out of Kafka.

Connector plugins provide the implementation for Kafka Connect to run connector instances.

> Connector instances create and orchestrate the tasks required to transfer data in and out of Kafka.

Reviewer: This isn't really true. They just create a bunch of task configs. The connect runtime does the orchestration and instantiation using the task configs provided by the connector.

Author: Updated to:

> Connector plugins provide the implementation for Kafka Connect to run connector instances.
> Connector instances create the tasks required to transfer data in and out of Kafka.
> The Kafka Connect runtime orchestrates the tasks to split the work required between the worker pods.

Tasks split the work required.

> The number of tasks created relates to the number of Kafka topics and partitions.

Reviewer: This isn't true. It's true for sink connectors that the number of tasks relates to the number of topic partitions being consumed. But for source connectors how the source data is partitioned is defined by the connector. For example a JDBC connector with `maxTasks=2` might take the set of tables to be imported, split it into two and return two task configs, one for consuming the one set of tables and the other for consuming the other.

Author: I've reworded this and move the content under _Tasks_

> For sink connectors, the number of tasks created relates to the number of partitions being consumed.
> For source connectors, how the source data is partitioned is defined by the connector.
> You can control the maximum number of tasks that can run in parallel by setting `tasksMax` in the connector configuration.

[NOTE]
--
Kafka provides two built-in connectors:

* `FileStreamSourceConnector` streams data from an external system to Kafka, reading lines from an input source and sending each line to a Kafka topic.
* `FileStreamSinkConnector` streams data from Kafka to an external system, reading messages from a Kafka topic and creating a line for each in an output file.
--

== Workers

Workers are individual pods in a Kubernetes cluster.

> A Kafka Connect cluster represents a group of workers with the same group id.

Author: Changed to _contains_

If a worker node fails, active workers share the tasks.
You can add to a group of worker nodes through configuration of the `replicas` property in the `KafkaConnect` resource.

Workers store the initial connector configuration deployed to the Kafka Connect cluster.
They also start connectors and their tasks.

* Source connector workers read events from an external data system and use converters to construct key and value pairs to store in Kafka.
* Sink connector workers read records from Kafka and use converters to construct records to pass into an external data system.

== Transforms

Kafka Connect translates and transforms external data.
Single-message transforms change messages into a format suitable for the target destination.
For example, a transform might insert or rename a field. Transforms can also filter and route data.
Connector plugins contain the implementation required for workers to perform one or more transformations.

* Source connectors transform data before converting it into a format supported by Kafka.
* Sink connectors transform data after converting it into a format suitable for an external data system.

> Kafka Connect provides a set of standard transforms, but you can also create your own.

Reviewer: As Java classes, packaged in a jar file and then treated  in the same way as any other plugin.

> Kafka Connect provides a set of standard transforms, but you can also create your own.

Author: I've updated to:

> A transform comprises a set of Java class files packaged in a JAR file for inclusion in a connector plugin. Kafka Connect provides a set of standard transforms, but you can also create your own.

== Converters

When a worker receives data, it converts the data into an appropriate format using a converter.
You specify converters for workers in the worker `config` in the `KafkaConnect` resource.

Kafka Connect can convert data to and from formats supported by Kafka, such as JSON or Avro.
It also supports schemas for structuring data.
If you are not converting data into a structured format, you don’t need to enable schemas.

NOTE: You can also specify converters for specific connectors to override the general Kafka Connect worker configuration that applies to all workers.

== Tasks

> Data transfer orchestrated by connector instances is split into tasks that run in parallel.

Reviewer: Again, it's not the connector instance which does orchestration of tasks, it's the connect runtime.

> A task is started using the configuration for the connector instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A task is started using the configuration supplied by a connector instance.
```

* Source connectors push data into Kafka.
* Sink connectors extract data out of Kafka.

Connector plugins provide the implementation for Kafka Connect to run connector instances.
Connector instances create the tasks required to transfer data in and out of Kafka.
The Kafka Connect runtime orchestrates the tasks to split the work required between the worker pods.

NOTE: MirrorMaker 2.0 also uses the Kafka Connect framework.
In this case, the external data system is another Kafka cluster.
Specialized connectors for MirrorMaker 2.0 manage data replication between source and target Kafka clusters.

[NOTE]
--
Kafka provides two built-in connectors:

* `FileStreamSourceConnector` streams data from an external system to Kafka, reading lines from an input source and sending each line to a Kafka topic.
* `FileStreamSinkConnector` streams data from Kafka to an external system, reading messages from a Kafka topic and creating a line for each in an output file.
--

== Workers

Workers are individual nodes in a Kubernetes cluster.
A Kafka Connect cluster contains a group of workers with the same group id.
The workers are assigned one or more connector instances and tasks.

> Workers perform processes for the connectors and tasks.

Author: removed

The distributed approach to deploying Kafka Connect is fault tolerant and scalable.
If a worker pod fails, active workers share the tasks.
You can add to a group of worker pods through configuration of the `replicas` property in the `KafkaConnect` resource.

Workers store the initial connector configuration deployed to the Kafka Connect cluster.
They also start connectors and their tasks.

* Source connector workers read events from an external data system and use converters to construct key and value pairs to store in Kafka.
* Sink connector workers read records from Kafka and use converters to construct records to pass into an external data system.

== Transforms

Kafka Connect translates and transforms external data.
Single-message transforms change messages into a format suitable for the target destination.
For example, a transform might insert or rename a field. Transforms can also filter and route data.

> Connector plugins contain the implementation required for workers to perform one or more transformations.

Author: I've dropped to just plugin here. I'll see how the whole reads after making these updates.

// This module is included in:
//
// overview/assembly-key-features.adoc

[id="key-features-kafka-connect_{context}"]
= How Kafka Connect streams data

[role="_abstract"]
Kafka Connect uses connector instances to integrate with other systems to stream data.

Kafka Connect loads existing connector instances on start up and distributes data streaming tasks and connector configuration across worker pods.
Workers run the tasks for the connector instances.
Each worker runs as a separate pod to make the Kafka Connect cluster more fault tolerant.

> Work is distributed evenly through load balancing and is divided into tasks.

Reviewer: I think we can drop this sentence. Or at least rework it. Firstly, there's nothing in connect which really tries to balance _load_ in a meaningful way. Tasks are distributed evenly, but there's nothing preventing, or adjusting things, if the hottest tasks land on the same worker. Secondly, I think we've made the "...is divided into tasks" point several time already. Even in this paragraph we've mentioned "task" twice already.

If there are more tasks than workers, workers are assigned multiple tasks.
If a worker fails, its tasks are automatically assigned to active workers in the Kafka Connect cluster.

The main Kafka Connect components used in streaming data are as follows:

* Connectors to create tasks

> * Tasks to split the work

Reviewer: Tasks are units of work. They don't do any splitting themselves.

> * Workers to start tasks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Workers to run tasks
```

Or execute

* Transforms to manipulate data
* Converters to convert data

== Connectors

> Connectors copy data from external systems to Kafka, or from Kafka into external systems.

Reviewer: We've already explained connectors by this point. How about starting with 

```suggestion
There are two kinds of connector
```

* Source connectors push data into Kafka.
* Sink connectors extract data out of Kafka.

Plugins provide the implementation for Kafka Connect to run connector instances.
Connector instances create the tasks required to transfer data in and out of Kafka.
The Kafka Connect runtime orchestrates the tasks to split the work required between the worker pods.

MirrorMaker 2.0 also uses the Kafka Connect framework.
In this case, the external data system is another Kafka cluster.
Specialized connectors for MirrorMaker 2.0 manage data replication between source and target Kafka clusters.

[NOTE]
--

> Kafka provides two built-in example connectors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the MirrorMaker 2 connectors, Kafka provides two built-in connectors as examples:
```

Maybe?

> * `FileStreamSourceConnector` streams data from an external system to Kafka, reading lines from an input source and sending each line to a Kafka topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `FileStreamSourceConnector` streams data from a file on the worker's filesystem to Kafka, reading the input file and sending each line to a given Kafka topic.
```

> * `FileStreamSinkConnector` streams data from Kafka to an external system, reading messages from a Kafka topic and creating a line for each in an output file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `FileStreamSinkConnector` streams data from Kafka to the worker's filesystem, reading messages from a Kafka topic and writing a line for each in an output file.
```

. Transforms adjust the records, such as filtering or relabelling them
. Converters put the records into a format suitable for Kafka
. The source connector is managed using KafkaConnectors or the Kafka Connect API

The following sink connector diagram shows the process flow when streaming data from Kafka to an external data system.

.Sink connector streaming data from Kafka
image:overview/kafka-concepts-sink-connector.png[Kafka Connect sink connector worker interaction in distributed mode]

. A plugin provides the implementation artifacts for the sink connector
. A single worker initiates the sink connector instance
. The sink connector creates the tasks to stream data
. Tasks run in parallel to poll Kafka and return records
. Converters put the records into a format suitable for the external data system
. Transforms adjust the records, such as filtering or relabelling them
. The sink connector is managed using KafkaConnectors or the Kafka Connect API

== Tasks

Data transfer orchestrated by the Kafka Connect runtime is split into tasks that run in parallel.
A task is started using the configuration supplied by a connector instance.

> Kafka Connect distributes tasks to workers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kafka Connect distributes the task configurations to workers, which instantiate and execute tasks.
```

* A source connector task polls the external data system and returns a list of records that a worker sends to the Kafka brokers.
* A sink connector task receives Kafka records from a worker for writing to the external data system.

> If a task fails, it can be restarted through the Kafka Connect API.

Reviewer: Is this concept really the place for suddenly bringing up the possibility of task failure? We didn't mention connector failure in the section on connectors.

Author: Yeah. It's out of place. I've removed

> For sink connectors, the number of tasks created relates to the number of partitions being consumed.

Reviewer: I do wonder whether using the word "partition" is really the right choice here. Connect uses the work "partition" to cover both Kafka topic partitions and also how the external system's data might be split up. This can be really confusing. It might have be better if connect had used a different word than partition (e.g. shard) when talking about external systems. At least that way partition would have been unambiguously a Kafka concept. The decision we have to make here is whether to deviate from the precedent set by Kafka, or just to call out that partition can refer to a shard of _any_ data source, Kafka or not. I guess the latter is the least worst option.

Author: Maybe a note:

> NOTE: In the context of Kafka Connect, a _partition_ can mean a topic partition or a _shard of data_ intended for an external system.

For source connectors, how the source data is partitioned is defined by the connector.

> You can control the maximum number of tasks that can run in parallel by setting `tasksMax` in the connector configuration.

Reviewer: Maybe mention that this is a maximum, and the connector might create fewer (for example, if it's not possible to partition that source data into that many partitions).

Author: Added:

> The connector might create fewer tasks than the maximum setting.
> For example, the connector might create fewer tasks if it's not possible to split the source data into that many partitions.

== Workers

> Workers store the initial connector configuration deployed to the Kafka Connect cluster.

Reviewer: Actually they stored in one of the internal Kafka topic used by connect, not on the workers.

Author: I wonder if we change to this here:

_Workers employ the initial connector configuration deployed to the Kafka Connect cluster. The configuration is stored in an internal Kafka topic used by Kafka Connect._

> They also start connectors and their tasks.

Reviewer: I think run or execute is better than `start`.

* Source connector workers read events from an external data system and use converters to construct key and value pairs to store in Kafka.

> * Sink connector workers read records from Kafka and use converters to construct records to pass into an external data system.

Reviewer: I don't think we need to explain this again. This section is about workers. It's enough to say they run connectors and tasks. What that means is explained in the sections on connectors and tasks.

Author: Removed

A Kafka Connect cluster contains a group of workers with the same `group.id`.
The ID identifies the cluster within Kafka.
The ID is assigned in the worker configuration through the `KafkaConnect` resource.
Worker configuration also specifies the names of internal Kafka Connect topics.

> The topics store connector offset and status information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The topics store connector configuration, offset and status information.
```

The group ID and names of these topics must also be unique to the Kafka Connect cluster.

Workers are assigned one or more connector instances and tasks.
The distributed approach to deploying Kafka Connect is fault tolerant and scalable.
If a worker pod fails, active workers share the tasks.
You can add to a group of worker pods through configuration of the `replicas` property in the `KafkaConnect` resource.

== Transforms

Kafka Connect translates and transforms external data.
Single-message transforms change messages into a format suitable for the target destination.
For example, a transform might insert or rename a field. Transforms can also filter and route data.
Plugins contain the implementation required for workers to perform one or more transformations.

* Source connectors transform data before converting it into a format supported by Kafka.

> * Sink connectors transform data after converting it into a format suitable for an external data system.

Reviewer: It might be clearer to explain when transforms are applied with respect to converters.
